‘But he’s your husband’
When Zoe Watts learned that her husband of 16 years had been crushing her son’s sleeping medicine into her tea and raping her while she was passed out, it shattered her world.  

“We worry about who’s coming behind us, walking down the street, or who’s even friending us on Facebook. You know, we worry about going to our car late at night in a car park, but we don't worry about who you lie next to. I didn't realize I had to,” Watts said.  

Her then husband's confession came on an otherwise ordinary Sunday in 2018, after the couple – who share four children – had returned from church.  

“He reeled off a list of his wrongdoings... as if it was, you know, a shopping list,” Watts said, speaking to CNN at her house in Devon, England.    

He told her the abuse had been going on for years.  

“He just sort of said... ‘I've been using our son's sleeping medication to put in your last cup of tea at night, to tie you down, take photographs and rape you.’”  

The admission left Watts questioning all their intimate moments.  

“At the end of a very busy day… I was just grateful I had a cup of tea before I went to bed, because I was so tired and didn't have to make it,” she said, adding: “You don't expect anything other than innocence to come from your partner.”  

Concerned about her children and still grappling with what had happened to her, she initially kept it a secret. The internal struggle eventually took a toll on her health.  

After a serious panic attack, Watts told her sister. Then their mother called the police. While she believes pressing charges was the right decision, at the time, it was agonizing. A four-year legal process saw her children become targets for bullying at school, and left her social network all but destroyed.  

Watts said one of the many difficult aspects of her ordeal has been confronting people’s assumptions about abuse within a marriage, even though she recognizes that they are rooted in misinformation and unconscious bias.

“I've had people say: ‘Yeah, but he's your husband,’ or ‘but you weren't awake.’ ‘So... it's not the same as being taken down an alleyway, is it?’”  

Her ex-husband is serving an 11-year sentence for rape, sexual assault by penetration and drugging.  

Watts still struggles to use the word rape to describe what happened to her. It is too painful.

“There's a shame and a guilt that comes with it, that, ‘Oh, maybe I should have known, or I can't believe I didn't realize. Why didn't I connect those dots?’ she said.